A glasshouse screening experiment using herbicides from 11 SOAs was conducted to evaluate multiple resistance patterns and identify potential control options. Overall, in postemergence treatments, resistant accessions exhibited high survival to rates of flumioxazin and pronamide alike, with most accessions showing > 75% survival (Fig. ). Survival to clethodim and simazine was accession‐dependent, with some resistant accessions like izr‐1 and izr‐19 exhibiting > 50% survival, with others exhibiting less than 25% survival. In contrast, rimsulfuron and glyphosate remained effective, with all resistant accessions showing < 13% survival. Preemergence herbicides varied in efficacy among resistant P. annua accessions (Fig. ). Fluridone applied preemergence was ineffective across several accessions, with izr‐1, izr‐2, izr‐5, and izr‐8 showing > 50% survival. Simazine, flumioxazin, methiozolin, and pendimethalin showed inconsistent performance, with survival ranging from 13% to 63%. In contrast, napropamide, dichlobenil, and pyroxasulfone provided greater control, resulting in < 13% survival. These findings indicate that resistance to indaziflam is often associated with resistance to multiple herbicide SOAs, significantly limiting chemical control options.

Field experiments conducted in a commercial hazelnut orchard, where indaziflam‐resistant accessions were collected, generally supported glasshouse results and confirmed the limited efficacy of certain herbicides under field conditions, though with some variablity (Fig. ). In terms of P. annua control (Fig. ), indaziflam applied preemergence at 95 and 190 g ha−1 provided > 85% control at 24 weeks after treatment, although with some variability and escapes were observed at the lower rate (Fig. ). In contrast, indaziflam applied postemergence (95 or 190 g ha−1) exhibited inconsistent control, with control values ranging from near 0% to 90%, and was not statistically different from the non‐treated control or treatment with glufosinate (Fig. ). Glufosinate (1680 g a.i. ha−1) was also ineffective, with control statistically similar to the non‐treated control because of new P. annua emergence. Moreover, pendimethalin, diuron, and fluridone provided statistically similar control as glufosinate and postemergence‐applied indaziflam, indicating low and inconsistent performance of these herbicides.
